README.md, before:


[comment]: # (#################################################################)
[comment]: # (Copyright 2016-24, Lawrence Livermore National Security, LLC)
[comment]: # (and RAJA project contributors. See the RAJA/LICENSE file)
[comment]: # (for details.)
[comment]: # 
[comment]: # (# SPDX-License-Identifier: BSD-3-Clause)
[comment]: # (#################################################################)

# <img src="/share/raja/logo/RAJA_LOGO_Color.png?raw=true" width="128" valign="middle" alt="RAJA"/>

[![Azure Pipeline Build Status](https://dev.azure.com/LLNL-RAJA/RAJA/_apis/build/status/LLNL.RAJA?branchName=develop)](https://dev.azure.com/LLNL-RAJA/RAJA/_build/latest?definitionId=1&branchName=develop)
[![Documentation Status](https://readthedocs.org/projects/raja/badge/?version=develop)](https://raja.readthedocs.io/en/develop/?badge=develop)
[![Coverage](https://img.shields.io/codecov/c/github/LLNL/RAJA/develop.svg)](https://codecov.io/gh/LLNL/RAJA)
[![Join the chat at https://gitter.im/llnl/raja](https://badges.gitter.im/llnl/raja.svg)](https://gitter.im/llnl/raja?utm_source=badge&utm_medium=badge&utm_campaign=pr-badge&utm_content=badge)

RAJA is a library of C++ software abstractions, primarily developed at
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory (LLNL), that enables architecture
and programming model portability for HPC applications. RAJA has two main goals:

  * To enable application portability with manageable disruption to existing
    algorithms and programming styles
  * To achieve performance comparable to using common programming models,
    such as OpenMP, CUDA, etc. directly.

RAJA offers portable, parallel loop execution by providing building blocks 
that extend the generally-accepted parallel for idiom. RAJA relies on standard 
C++14 features.

RAJA's design is rooted in decades of experience working on 
production mesh-based multiphysics applications. Based on the diversity of
algorithms and software engineering styles used in such applications, RAJA 
is designed to enable application developers to adapt RAJA concepts and 
specialize them for different code implementation patterns and C++ usage.

RAJA shares goals and concepts found in
other C++ portability abstraction approaches, such as
[Kokkos](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos)
and [Thrust](https://developer.nvidia.com/thrust). 
However, it includes concepts and capabilities that are absent in other models 
that are fundamental to applications we work with.

It is important to note that, although RAJA is used in a diversity of 
production applications, it is very much a work-in-progress. The community 
of researchers and application developers at LLNL that actively contribute to 
it is growing. Versions available as [GitHub releases](https://github.com/LLNL/RAJA/releases) contain mostly well-used and well-tested features. Our core 
interfaces are fairly stable while underlying implementations are being 
refined. Additional features will appear in future releases.

Quick Start
-----------

The RAJA code lives in a GitHub [repository](https://github.com/llnl/raja).
To clone the repo, use the command:

    git clone --recursive https://github.com/llnl/raja.git

Then, you can build RAJA like any other CMake project, provided you have a C++
compiler that supports the C++14 standard. The simplest way to build the code,
using your system default compiler, is to run the following sequence of 
commands in the top-level RAJA directory (in-source builds are not allowed!):

    mkdir build
    cd build
    cmake ../
    make

More details about RAJA configuration options are located in the RAJA User Guide
(linked below). 

We also maintain a [**RAJA Template Project**](https://github.com/LLNL/RAJA-project-template) that shows how to use RAJA in a CMake project, either as a Git
submodule or as an installed library.

User Documentation
-------------------

The RAJA User Guide is the best place to start learning about RAJA and how to
use it.

The most recent version of the User Guide (RAJA develop branch): https://raja.readthedocs.io

To access docs for other RAJA released versions: https://readthedocs.org/projects/raja/

To cite RAJA, please use the following references:

* RAJA Performance Portability Layer. https://github.com/LLNL/RAJA

* D. A. Beckingsale, J. Burmark, R. Hornung, H. Jones, W. Killian, A. J. Kunen, O. Pearce, P. Robinson, B. S. Ryujin, T. R. W. Scogland, "RAJA: Portable Performance for Large-Scale Scientific Applications", 2019 IEEE/ACM International Workshop on Performance, Portability and Productivity in HPC (P3HPC). [Download here](https://conferences.computer.org/sc19w/2019/#!/toc/14)

Related Software
--------------------

The [**RAJA Performance Suite**](https://github.com/LLNL/RAJAPerf) contains
a collection of loop kernels implemented in multiple RAJA and non-RAJA
variants. We use it to monitor and assess RAJA performance on different
platforms using a variety of compilers. Many major compiler vendors use the
Suite to improve their support of abstractions like RAJA. 

The [**RAJA Proxies**](https://github.com/LLNL/RAJAProxies) repository 
contains RAJA versions of several important HPC proxy applications.

[**CHAI**](https://github.com/LLNL/CHAI) provides a managed array abstraction
that works with RAJA to automatically copy data used in RAJA kernels to the
appropriate space for execution. It was developed as a complement to RAJA.

Communicate with Us
-------------------

The most effective way to communicate with the core RAJA development team
is via our mailing list: **raja-dev@llnl.gov** 

You are also welcome to join our [RAJA Google Group](https://groups.google.com/forum/#!forum/raja-users).

If you have questions, find a bug, or have ideas about expanding the
functionality or applicability of RAJA and are interested in contributing
to its development, please do not hesitate to contact us. We are very
interested in improving RAJA and exploring new ways to use it.

Contributions
---------------

The RAJA team follows the [GitFlow](http://nvie.com/posts/a-successful-git-branching-model/) development model. Folks wishing to contribute to RAJA, should
include their work in a feature branch created from the RAJA `develop` branch.
That branch contains the latest work in RAJA. Then, create a pull request 
with the `develop` branch as the destination. Periodically, we merge the 
develop branch into the `main` branch and tag a new release.

Authors
-----------

Please see the [RAJA Contributors Page](https://github.com/LLNL/RAJA/graphs/contributors), to see the full list of contributors to the project.


License
-----------

RAJA is licensed under the [BSD 3-Clause license](https://opensource.org/licenses/BSD-3-Clause).

Copyrights and patents in the RAJA project are retained by contributors.
No copyright assignment is required to contribute to RAJA.

Unlimited Open Source - BSD 3-clause Distribution
`LLNL-CODE-689114`  `OCEC-16-063`

For release details and restrictions, please see the information in the
following:
- [RELEASE](./RELEASE)
- [LICENSE](./LICENSE)
- [NOTICE](./NOTICE)


SPDX usage
------------

Individual files contain SPDX tags instead of the full license text.
This enables machine processing of license information based on the SPDX
License Identifiers that are available here: https://spdx.org/licenses/

Files that are licensed as BSD 3-Clause contain the following
text in the license header:

    SPDX-License-Identifier: (BSD-3-Clause)

External Packages
-------------------
RAJA bundles its external dependencies as submodules in the git repository.
These packages are covered by various permissive licenses.  A summary listing
follows. See the license included with each package for full details.

PackageName: BLT  
PackageHomePage: https://github.com/LLNL/blt  
PackageLicenseDeclared: BSD-3-Clause

PackageName: camp   
PackageHomePage: https://github.com/LLNL/camp  
PackageLicenseDeclared: BSD-3-Clause

PackageName: CUB   
PackageHomePage: https://github.com/NVlabs/cub  
PackageLicenseDeclared: BSD-3-Clause

PackageName: rocPRIM   
PackageHomePage: https://github.com/ROCmSoftwarePlatform/rocPRIM.git  
PackageLicenseDeclared: MIT License

Commit message:

Add refs and links to RAJA Perf and a couple other updates.
Users find looking at RAJA Perf as a source of RAJA usage examples instructive.
Hopefully, these modest changes will help them navigate to that project.

README.md, after:


[comment]: # (#################################################################)
[comment]: # (Copyright 2016-24, Lawrence Livermore National Security, LLC)
[comment]: # (and RAJA project contributors. See the RAJA/LICENSE file)
[comment]: # (for details.)
[comment]: # 
[comment]: # (# SPDX-License-Identifier: BSD-3-Clause)
[comment]: # (#################################################################)

# <img src="/share/raja/logo/RAJA_LOGO_Color.png?raw=true" width="128" valign="middle" alt="RAJA"/>

[![Azure Pipeline Build Status](https://dev.azure.com/LLNL-RAJA/RAJA/_apis/build/status/LLNL.RAJA?branchName=develop)](https://dev.azure.com/LLNL-RAJA/RAJA/_build/latest?definitionId=1&branchName=develop)
[![Documentation Status](https://readthedocs.org/projects/raja/badge/?version=develop)](https://raja.readthedocs.io/en/develop/?badge=develop)
[![Coverage](https://img.shields.io/codecov/c/github/LLNL/RAJA/develop.svg)](https://codecov.io/gh/LLNL/RAJA)
[![Join the chat at https://gitter.im/llnl/raja](https://badges.gitter.im/llnl/raja.svg)](https://gitter.im/llnl/raja?utm_source=badge&utm_medium=badge&utm_campaign=pr-badge&utm_content=badge)

RAJA is a library of C++ software abstractions, primarily developed at
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory (LLNL), that enables architecture
and programming model portability for HPC applications. RAJA has two main goals:

  * To enable application portability with manageable disruption to existing
    algorithms and programming styles
  * To achieve performance comparable to using common programming models,
    such as OpenMP, CUDA, etc. directly.

RAJA offers portable, parallel loop execution by providing building blocks 
that extend the generally-accepted parallel for idiom. RAJA relies on standard 
C++14 features.

RAJA's design is rooted in decades of experience working on 
production mesh-based multiphysics applications. Based on the diversity of
algorithms and software engineering styles used in such applications, RAJA 
is designed to enable application developers to adapt RAJA concepts and 
specialize them for different code implementation patterns and C++ usage.

RAJA shares goals and concepts found in
other C++ portability abstraction approaches, such as
[Kokkos](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos)
and [Thrust](https://developer.nvidia.com/thrust). 
However, it includes concepts and capabilities that are absent in other models 
that are fundamental to applications we work with.

It is important to note that, although RAJA is used in a diversity of 
production applications, it is very much a work-in-progress. The community 
of researchers and application developers at LLNL that actively contribute to 
it is growing. Versions available as [GitHub releases](https://github.com/LLNL/RAJA/releases) contain mostly well-used and well-tested features. Our core 
interfaces are fairly stable while underlying implementations are being 
refined. Additional features will appear in future releases.

Quick Start
-----------

The RAJA code lives in a GitHub [repository](https://github.com/llnl/raja).
To clone the repo, use the command:

    git clone --recursive https://github.com/llnl/raja.git

Then, you can build RAJA like any other CMake project, provided you have a C++
compiler that supports the C++14 standard. The simplest way to build the code,
using your system default compiler, is to run the following sequence of 
commands in the top-level RAJA directory (in-source builds are not allowed!):

    mkdir build
    cd build
    cmake ../
    make

More details about RAJA configuration options are located in the RAJA User Guide
(linked below). 

We also maintain a [**RAJA Template Project**](https://github.com/LLNL/RAJA-project-template) that shows how to use RAJA in a CMake project, either as a Git
submodule or as an installed library.

User Documentation
-------------------

The RAJA User Guide is the best place to start learning about RAJA and how to
use it.

The most recent version of the User Guide (RAJA develop branch): https://raja.readthedocs.io

To access docs for other RAJA released versions: https://readthedocs.org/projects/raja/

To cite RAJA, please use the following references:

* RAJA Performance Portability Layer. https://github.com/LLNL/RAJA

* D. A. Beckingsale, J. Burmark, R. Hornung, H. Jones, W. Killian, A. J. Kunen, O. Pearce, P. Robinson, B. S. Ryujin, T. R. W. Scogland, "RAJA: Portable Performance for Large-Scale Scientific Applications", 2019 IEEE/ACM International Workshop on Performance, Portability and Productivity in HPC (P3HPC). [Download here](https://conferences.computer.org/sc19w/2019/#!/toc/14)

Related Software
--------------------

The [**RAJA Performance Suite**](https://github.com/LLNL/RAJAPerf) contains
a collection of loop kernels implemented in multiple RAJA and non-RAJA
variants. We use it to monitor and assess RAJA performance on different
platforms using a variety of compilers. Many major compiler vendors use the
Suite to improve their support of abstractions like RAJA. **The RAJA
Performance Suite is an excellent source of examples of RAJA usage where you
can compare RAJA and non-RAJA variants of a variety of different kernels and
RAJA back-ends.**

The [**RAJA Proxies**](https://github.com/LLNL/RAJAProxies) repository 
contains RAJA versions of several important HPC proxy applications.

[**CHAI**](https://github.com/LLNL/CHAI) provides a managed array abstraction
that works with RAJA to automatically copy data used in RAJA kernels to the
appropriate space for execution. It was developed as a complement to RAJA.

Communicate with Us
-------------------

The most effective way to communicate with the core RAJA development team
is via our mailing list: **raja-dev@llnl.gov** 

You are also welcome to join our [RAJA Google Group](https://groups.google.com/forum/#!forum/raja-users).

If you have questions, find a bug, or have ideas about expanding the
functionality or applicability of RAJA and are interested in contributing
to its development, please do not hesitate to contact us. We are very
interested in improving RAJA and exploring new ways to use it.

Contributions
---------------

The RAJA team follows the [GitFlow](http://nvie.com/posts/a-successful-git-branching-model/) development model. Folks wishing to contribute to RAJA, should
include their work in a feature branch created from the RAJA `develop` branch.
That branch contains the latest work in RAJA. Then, create a pull request 
with the `develop` branch as the destination. Periodically, we merge the 
develop branch into the `main` branch and tag a new release.

Authors
-----------

Please see the [RAJA Contributors Page](https://github.com/LLNL/RAJA/graphs/contributors), to see the full list of contributors to the project.


License
-----------

RAJA is licensed under the [BSD 3-Clause license](https://opensource.org/licenses/BSD-3-Clause).

Copyrights and patents in the RAJA project are retained by contributors.
No copyright assignment is required to contribute to RAJA.

Unlimited Open Source - BSD 3-clause Distribution
`LLNL-CODE-689114`  `OCEC-16-063`

For release details and restrictions, please see the information in the
following:
- [RELEASE](./RELEASE)
- [LICENSE](./LICENSE)
- [NOTICE](./NOTICE)


SPDX usage
------------

Individual files contain SPDX tags instead of the full license text.
This enables machine processing of license information based on the SPDX
License Identifiers that are available here: https://spdx.org/licenses/

Files that are licensed as BSD 3-Clause contain the following
text in the license header:

    SPDX-License-Identifier: (BSD-3-Clause)

External Packages
-------------------
RAJA bundles its external dependencies as submodules in the git repository.
These packages are covered by various permissive licenses.  A summary listing
follows. See the license included with each package for full details.

PackageName: BLT  
PackageHomePage: https://github.com/LLNL/blt  
PackageLicenseDeclared: BSD-3-Clause

PackageName: camp   
PackageHomePage: https://github.com/LLNL/camp  
PackageLicenseDeclared: BSD-3-Clause

PackageName: CUB   
PackageHomePage: https://github.com/NVlabs/cub  
PackageLicenseDeclared: BSD-3-Clause

PackageName: rocPRIM   
PackageHomePage: https://github.com/ROCmSoftwarePlatform/rocPRIM.git  
PackageLicenseDeclared: MIT License
