docs/sphinx/user_guide/tutorial/atomic_histogram.rst, before:

.. ##
.. ## Copyright (c) 2016-22, Lawrence Livermore National Security, LLC
.. ## and RAJA project contributors. See the RAJA/LICENSE file
.. ## for details.
.. ##
.. ## SPDX-License-Identifier: (BSD-3-Clause)
.. ##

.. _atomichist-label:

--------------------------------------------------
Computing a Histogram with Atomic Operations
--------------------------------------------------

This section contains a working exercise at ``exercises/atomic-histogram.cpp``. 

Key RAJA features shown in this exercise are:

  * ``RAJA::forall`` loop execution template 
  * ``RAJA::RangeSegment`` iteration space construct
  * RAJA atomic add operation and RAJA atomic operation policies

The file ``RAJA/exercises/atomic-histogram_solution.cpp`` contains complete 
working code for the examples discussed in this section.

The example uses an integer array of length 'N' randomly initialized with 
values in the interval [0, M). While iterating over the array, the kernel 
accumulates the number of occurrences of each value in the array in another
array named 'bins' using atomic add operations. Atomic operations allow one 
to update a memory location referenced by a specific address in parallel 
without data races. The example shows how to use RAJA portable atomic 
operations and that they are used similarly for different programming model 
back-ends. 

.. note:: Each RAJA atomic operation requires an atomic policy type
          parameter that must be compatible with the execution policy for 
          the kernel in which it is used. This is similar to the reduction
          policies we described in :ref:`dotproduct-label`.

For a complete description of supported RAJA atomic operations and 
atomic policies, please see :ref:`atomics-label`.

All code snippets described below use the stride-1 iteration space range:

.. literalinclude:: ../../../../exercises/atomic-histogram_solution.cpp
   :start-after: _range_atomic_histogram_start
   :end-before: _range_atomic_histogram_end
   :language: C++

and the integer array 'bins' of length 'M' to accumulate the number of 
occurrences of each value in the array.

Here is the OpenMP version:

.. literalinclude:: ../../../../exercises/atomic-histogram_solution.cpp
   :start-after: _rajaomp_atomic_histogram_start
   :end-before: _rajaomp_atomic_histogram_end
   :language: C++

Each slot in the 'bins' array is incremented by one when a value associated 
with that slot is encountered. Note that the ``RAJA::atomicAdd`` 
operation uses an OpenMP atomic policy, which is compatible with the OpenMP 
loop execution policy.

The CUDA and HIP versions are similar:

.. literalinclude:: ../../../../exercises/atomic-histogram_solution.cpp
   :start-after: _rajacuda_atomic_histogram_start
   :end-before: _rajacuda_atomic_histogram_end
   :language: C++

and:

.. literalinclude:: ../../../../exercises/atomic-histogram_solution.cpp
   :start-after: _rajahip_atomic_histogram_start
   :end-before: _rajahip_atomic_histogram_end
   :language: C++

Here, the atomic add operations uses CUDA and HIP atomic policies, which are 
compatible with the CUDA and HIP loop execution policies.

Note that RAJA provides an ``auto_atomic`` policy for easier usage and 
improved portability. This policy will do the right thing in most 
circumstances. If OpenMP is enabled, the OpenMP atomic policy will be used, 
which is correct in a sequential execution context as well. Otherwise, the 
sequential atomic policy will be applied. Similarly, if it is encountered in 
a CUDA or HIP execution context, the corresponding GPU back-end atomic policy 
will be applied. 

For example, here is the CUDA version that uses the 'auto' atomic policy:

.. literalinclude:: ../../../../exercises/atomic-histogram_solution.cpp
   :start-after: _rajacuda_atomicauto_histogram_start
   :end-before: _rajacuda_atomicauto_histogram_end
   :language: C++

and the HIP version:

.. literalinclude:: ../../../../exercises/atomic-histogram_solution.cpp
   :start-after: _rajahip_atomicauto_histogram_start
   :end-before: _rajahip_atomicauto_histogram_end
   :language: C++

The same CUDA and HIP loop execution policies as in the previous examples 
are used.

Commit message:

Edits to histogram content. Adding snippet on how the array is generated.

docs/sphinx/user_guide/tutorial/atomic_histogram.rst, after:

.. ##
.. ## Copyright (c) 2016-22, Lawrence Livermore National Security, LLC
.. ## and RAJA project contributors. See the RAJA/LICENSE file
.. ## for details.
.. ##
.. ## SPDX-License-Identifier: (BSD-3-Clause)
.. ##

.. _atomichist-label:

--------------------------------------------------
Computing a Histogram with Atomic Operations
--------------------------------------------------

This section contains a working exercise at ``exercises/atomic-histogram.cpp``. 

Key RAJA features shown in this exercise are:

  * ``RAJA::forall`` loop execution template 
  * ``RAJA::RangeSegment`` iteration space construct
  * RAJA atomic add operation and RAJA atomic operation policies

The file ``RAJA/exercises/atomic-histogram_solution.cpp`` contains complete 
working code for the examples discussed in this section.

The example uses an integer array of length 'N' randomly initialized with 
values in the interval [0, M). 

.. literalinclude:: ../../../../exercises/atomic-histogram_solution.cpp
   :start-after: _array_atomic_histogram_start
   :end-before: _array_atomic_histogram_end
   :language: C++

While iterating over the array, the kernel 
accumulates the number of occurrences of each value in the array in another
array named 'hist' using atomic add operations. Atomic operations allow one 
to update a memory location referenced by a specific address in parallel 
without data races. The example shows how to use RAJA portable atomic 
operations and that they are used similarly for different programming model 
back-ends. 

.. note:: Each RAJA atomic operation requires an atomic policy type
          parameter that must be compatible with the execution policy for 
          the kernel in which it is used. This is similar to the reduction
          policies we described in :ref:`dotproduct-label`.

For a complete description of supported RAJA atomic operations and 
atomic policies, please see :ref:`atomics-label`.

All code snippets described below use the stride-1 iteration space range:

.. literalinclude:: ../../../../exercises/atomic-histogram_solution.cpp
   :start-after: _range_atomic_histogram_start
   :end-before: _range_atomic_histogram_end
   :language: C++

and the integer array 'hist' of length 'M' to accumulate the number of 
occurrences of each value in the array.

Here is the OpenMP version:

.. literalinclude:: ../../../../exercises/atomic-histogram_solution.cpp
   :start-after: _rajaomp_atomic_histogram_start
   :end-before: _rajaomp_atomic_histogram_end
   :language: C++

Each slot in the 'bins' array is incremented by one when a value associated 
with that slot is encountered. Note that the ``RAJA::atomicAdd`` 
operation uses an OpenMP atomic policy, which is compatible with the OpenMP 
loop execution policy.

The CUDA and HIP versions are similar:

.. literalinclude:: ../../../../exercises/atomic-histogram_solution.cpp
   :start-after: _rajacuda_atomic_histogram_start
   :end-before: _rajacuda_atomic_histogram_end
   :language: C++

and:

.. literalinclude:: ../../../../exercises/atomic-histogram_solution.cpp
   :start-after: _rajahip_atomic_histogram_start
   :end-before: _rajahip_atomic_histogram_end
   :language: C++

Here, the atomic add operations uses CUDA and HIP atomic policies, which are 
compatible with the CUDA and HIP loop execution policies.

Note that RAJA provides an ``auto_atomic`` policy for easier usage and 
improved portability. This policy will do the right thing in most 
circumstances. If OpenMP is enabled, the OpenMP atomic policy will be used, 
which is correct in a sequential execution context as well. Otherwise, the 
sequential atomic policy will be applied. Similarly, if it is encountered in 
a CUDA or HIP execution context, the corresponding GPU back-end atomic policy 
will be applied. 

For example, here is the CUDA version that uses the 'auto' atomic policy:

.. literalinclude:: ../../../../exercises/atomic-histogram_solution.cpp
   :start-after: _rajacuda_atomicauto_histogram_start
   :end-before: _rajacuda_atomicauto_histogram_end
   :language: C++

and the HIP version:

.. literalinclude:: ../../../../exercises/atomic-histogram_solution.cpp
   :start-after: _rajahip_atomicauto_histogram_start
   :end-before: _rajahip_atomicauto_histogram_end
   :language: C++

The same CUDA and HIP loop execution policies as in the previous examples 
are used.
