docs/sphinx/user_guide/tutorial/matrix_transpose_local_array.rst, before:

.. ##
.. ## Copyright (c) 2016-22, Lawrence Livermore National Security, LLC
.. ## and RAJA project contributors. See the RAJA/LICENSE file
.. ## for details.
.. ##
.. ## SPDX-License-Identifier: (BSD-3-Clause)
.. ##

.. _matrixtransposelocalarray-label:

-----------------------------------------
Tiled Matrix Transpose with Local Array
-----------------------------------------

This section extends the discussion in :ref:`tiledmatrixtranspose-label`
by adding *local array* objects which are used to store data for each tile in
CPU stack-allocated arrays or GPU thread local and shared memory to be used 
within kernels.

There are exercise files
``RAJA/exercises/kernel-matrix-transpose-local-array.cpp`` and
``RAJA/exercises/launch-matrix-transpose-local-array.cpp`` for you to work 
through if you wish to get some practice with RAJA. The files
``RAJA/exercises/kernel-matrix-transpose-local-array._solutioncpp`` and
``RAJA/exercises/launch-matrix-transpose-local-array_solution.cpp`` contain
complete working code for the examples. You can use the solution files to
check your work and for guidance if you get stuck.

Key RAJA features shown in this example are:

  * ``RAJA::kernel_param`` method and execution policy usage with multiple lambda expressions
  * ``RAJA::statement::Tile`` type for loop tiling
  * ``RAJA::statement::ForICount`` type for generating local tile indices
  * ``RAJA::LocalArray`` type for thread-local tile memory arrays
  * ``RAJA::launch`` kernel execution interface
  * ``RAJA::expt::tile`` type for loop tiling
  * ``RAJA::expt::loop_icount`` method to generate local tile indices for Launch
  * ``RAJA_TEAM_SHARED`` macro for thread-local tile memory arrays

As in :ref:`tiledmatrixtranspose-label`, this example computes the transpose 
of an input matrix :math:`A` of size :math:`N_r \times N_c` and stores the 
result in a second matrix :math:`At` of size :math:`N_c \times N_r`. The 
operation uses a local memory tiling algorithm. The algorithm tiles the outer 
loops and iterates over tiles in inner loops. The algorithm first loads 
input matrix entries into a local two-dimensional array for a tile, and then 
reads from the tile swapping the row and column indices to generate the output 
matrix. 

We choose tile dimensions smaller than the dimensions of the matrix and note 
that it is not necessary for the tile dimensions to divide evenly the number
of rows and columns in the matrix. As in the :ref:`tiledmatrixtranspose-label`
example, we start by defining the number of rows and columns in the matrices, 
the tile dimensions, and the number of tiles.

.. literalinclude:: ../../../../exercises/kernel-matrix-transpose-local-array_solution.cpp
   :start-after: // _mattranspose_localarray_dims_start
   :end-before: // _mattranspose_localarray_dims_end
   :language: C++

We also use RAJA View objects to simplify the multi-dimensional indexing
as in the :ref:`tiledmatrixtranspose-label` example.

.. literalinclude:: ../../../../exercises/kernel-matrix-transpose-local-array_solution.cpp
   :start-after: // _mattranspose_localarray_views_start
   :end-before: // _mattranspose_localarray_views_end
   :language: C++

The complete sequential C-style implementation of the tiled transpose operation 
using a stack-allocated local array for the tiles is:

.. literalinclude:: ../../../../exercises/kernel-matrix-transpose-local-array_solution.cpp
   :start-after: // _mattranspose_localarray_cstyle_start
   :end-before: // _mattranspose_localarray_cstyle_end
   :language: C++

.. note:: * To prevent indexing out of bounds, when the tile dimensions do not
            divide evenly the matrix dimensions, we use a bounds check in the
            inner loops.
          * For efficiency, we order the inner loops so that reading from
            the input matrix and writing to the output matrix both use
            stride-1 data access.

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
``RAJA::kernel`` Variants
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The ``RAJA::kernel`` interface provides mechanisms to tile loops and use 
*local arrays* in kernels so that algorithm patterns like the C-style kernel 
above can be implemented with RAJA. When using ``RAJA::kernel``, a 
``RAJA::LocalArray`` type specifies an object whose memory is created inside 
a kernel using a statement type in a RAJA kernel execution policy. The local 
array data is only usable within the kernel. See :ref:`local_array-label` for 
more information. 

``RAJA::kernel`` methods also support loop tiling statements which determine 
the number of tiles needed to perform an operation based on tile size and
extent of the corresponding iteration space. Moreover, lambda expressions for
the kernel will not be invoked for iterations outside the bounds of an 
iteration space when tile dimensions do not divide evenly the size of the
iteration space; thus, no conditional checks on loop bounds are needed
inside inner loops.

For the RAJA version of the matrix transpose kernel above, we define the
type of the ``RAJA::LocalArray`` used for matrix entries in a tile and
create an object to represent it: 

.. literalinclude:: ../../../../exercises/kernel-matrix-transpose-local-array_solution.cpp
   :start-after: // _mattranspose_localarray_start
   :end-before: // _mattranspose_localarray_end
   :language: C++

The template parameters that define the type are: the array data type, the 
data stride permutation for the array indices (here the identity permutation 
is given, so the default RAJA conventions apply; i.e., the rightmost array 
index will be stride-1), and the array dimensions. Next, we compare two 
``RAJA::kernel`` implementations of the matrix transpose operation.

The complete RAJA sequential CPU variant with kernel execution policy and 
kernel is:

.. literalinclude:: ../../../../exercises/kernel-matrix-transpose-local-array_solution.cpp
   :start-after: // _mattranspose_localarray_raja_start
   :end-before: // _mattranspose_localarray_raja_end
   :language: C++

In the execution policy, the ``RAJA::statement::Tile`` types define
tiling of the outer 'row' (iteration space tuple index '1') and 'col' 
(iteration space tuple index '0') loops, as well as tile sizes 
(``RAJA::tile_fixed`` types) and loop execution policies. Next, 
the ``RAJA::statement::InitLocalMem`` type allocates the local tile array
based on the memory policy type (here, we use ``RAJA::cpu_tile_mem`` for
a CPU stack-allocated array). The ``RAJA::ParamList<2>`` parameter indicates 
that the local array object is associated with position '2' in the parameter 
tuple argument passed to the ``RAJA::kernel_param`` method. The first two
entries in the parameter tuple indicate storage for the local tile indices 
that are used in the two lambda expressions that comprise the kernel body.
Finally, we have two sets of nested inner loops for reading the input matrix 
entries into the local tile array and writing them out to the output matrix 
transpose. The inner bodies of each of these loop nests are identified by 
lambda expression invocation statements ``RAJA::statement::Lambda<0>`` for
the first lambda passed as an argument to the ``RAJA::kernel_param`` method
and ``RAJA::statement::Lambda<1>`` for the second lambda argument.

Note that the loops within tiles use ``RAJA::statement::ForICount`` types 
rather than ``RAJA::statement::For`` types that we saw in the 
tiled matrix transpose example in :ref:`tiledmatrixtranspose-label`.
The ``RAJA::statement::ForICount`` type generates local tile indices that 
are passed to lambda loop body expressions to index into the local tile
memory array. As the reader will observe, there is no local tile index 
computation needed in the lambdas for the RAJA version of the kernel as a 
result. The first integer template parameter for each 
``RAJA::statement::ForICount`` type indicates the item in the iteration space 
tuple passed to the ``RAJA::kernel_param`` method to which it applies. 
The second template parameter for each 
``RAJA::statement::ForICount`` type indicates the position in the parameter 
tuple passed to the ``RAJA::kernel_param`` method that will hold the 
associated local tile index. For more detailed discussion of RAJA loop tiling 
statement types, please see :ref:`tiling-label`.

Now that we have described the execution policy in some detail, let's pull 
everything together by briefly walking though the call to the 
``RAJA::kernel_param`` method, which is similar to ``RAJA::kernel`` but takes
additional arguments needed to execute the operations involving local
tile indices and the local memory array. The first argument is a tuple of 
iteration spaces that define the iteration ranges for the levels in the loop 
nest. Again, the first integer parameters given to the ``RAJA::statement::Tile``
and ``RAJA::statement::ForICount`` types identify the tuple entry to which 
they apply. The second argument::

  RAJA::make_tuple((int)0, (int)0, Tile_Array)

is a tuple of data parameters that will hold the local tile indices and 
``RAJA::LocalArray`` tile memory. The tuple entries are 
associated with various statements in the execution policy as we described
earlier. Next, two lambda expression arguments are passed to the 
``RAJA::kernel_param`` method for reading and writing the input and output 
matrix entries, respectively.

.. note:: ``RAJA::kernel_param`` accepts a parameter tuple argument after
          the iteration space tuple, which enables the parameters to be 
          used in multiple lambda expressions in a kernel.

In the kernel, both lambda expressions take the same five arguments. The first 
two are the matrix global column and row indices associated with the iteration 
space tuple. The next three arguments correspond to the parameter tuple entries.
The first two of these are the local tile indices used to access entries in the 
``RAJA::LocalArray`` object memory. The last argument is a reference to the 
``RAJA::LocalArray`` object itself.

The next ``RAJA::kernel_param`` variant we present works the same as the one 
above. It is different from the previous version since we include 
additional template parameters in the ``RAJA::statement::Lambda`` types to 
indicate which arguments each lambda expression takes and in which order. 
Here is the complete version including execution policy and kernel:

.. literalinclude:: ../../../../exercises/kernel-matrix-transpose-local-array_solution.cpp
   :start-after: // _raja_mattranspose_lambdaargs_start
   :end-before: // _raja_mattranspose_lambdaargs_start
   :language: C++

Here, the two ``RAJA::statement::Lambda`` types in the execution policy show
two different ways to specify the segments (``RAJA::Segs``) 
associated with the matrix column and row indices. That is, we can use a 
``Segs`` statement for each argument, or include multiple segment ids in one
statement. 

Note that we are using ``RAJA::statement::For`` types for the inner tile
loops instead of `RAJA::statement::ForICount`` types used in the first variant.
As a consequence of specifying lambda arguments, there are two main differences.
The local tile indices are properly computed and passed to the lambda 
expressions as a result of the ``RAJA::Offsets`` types that appear
in the lambda statement types. The ``RAJA::statement::Lambda`` type for each
lambda shows the two ways to specify the local tile index arguments; we can 
use an ``Offsets`` statement for each argument, or include multiple segment 
ids in one statement. Lastly, there is only one entry in the parameter
tuple in this case, the local tile array. The placeholders in the
previous example are not needed.

.. note:: In this example, we need all five arguments in each lambda 
          expression so the lambda expression argument lists are 
          the same. Another use case for the template parameter argument
          specification described here is to be able to pass only the
          arguments used in a lambda expression. In particular when we use
          multiple lambda expressions to represent a kernel, each lambda
          can have a different argument lists from the others.

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
``RAJA::expt::launch`` Variants
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The ``RAJA::expt::launch`` interface provides mechanisms to tile loops and use 
*local arrays* in kernels to support algorithm patterns like the C-style kernel 
above. When, using ``RAJA::expt::launch``, the ``RAJA_TEAM_SHARED`` macro is
used to create a GPU shared memory array or a CPU stack memory array inside
a kernel.

``RAJA::expt::launch`` support methods for tiling over an iteration space
using ``RAJA::expt::tile`` and ``RAJA::expt::loop_icount`` methods to tile
loops and generate global iteration indices and local tile offsets.
Moreover, lambda expressions for these methods will not be invoked for
iterations outside the bounds of an iteration space when tile dimensions
do not divide evenly the size of the iteration space; thus, no conditional
checks on loop bounds are needed inside inner loops.

A complete RAJA sequential CPU variant with kernel execution policy and 
kernel is:

.. literalinclude:: ../../../../exercises/launch-matrix-transpose-local-array_solution.cpp
   :start-after: // _mattranspose_localarray_raja_start
   :end-before: // _mattranspose_localarray_raja_end
   :language: C++

Here, the ``RAJA::expt::tile`` method is used to create tilings of the outer 
'row' and 'col' iteration spaces. The ``RAJA::expt::tile`` method
takes an additional argument specifying the tile size for the corresponding 
loop. To traverse the tile, we use the ``RAJA::expt::loop_icount`` method, 
which is similar to the ``RAJA::ForICount`` statement used in a 
``RAJA::kernel`` execution policy as shown above. A 
``RAJA::expt::loop_icount`` method call
will generate local tile index associated with the outer global index.
The local tile index is necessary as we use it to read and write entries 
from/to global memory to ``RAJA_TEAM_SHARED`` memory array.

Commit message:

Adding a note to each exercise on how to build appropriate targets.

docs/sphinx/user_guide/tutorial/matrix_transpose_local_array.rst, after:

.. ##
.. ## Copyright (c) 2016-22, Lawrence Livermore National Security, LLC
.. ## and RAJA project contributors. See the RAJA/LICENSE file
.. ## for details.
.. ##
.. ## SPDX-License-Identifier: (BSD-3-Clause)
.. ##

.. _matrixtransposelocalarray-label:

-----------------------------------------
Tiled Matrix Transpose with Local Array
-----------------------------------------

This section extends the discussion in :ref:`tiledmatrixtranspose-label`
by adding *local array* objects which are used to store data for each tile in
CPU stack-allocated arrays or GPU thread local and shared memory to be used 
within kernels.

There are exercise files
``RAJA/exercises/kernel-matrix-transpose-local-array.cpp`` and
``RAJA/exercises/launch-matrix-transpose-local-array.cpp`` for you to work 
through if you wish to get some practice with RAJA. The files
``RAJA/exercises/kernel-matrix-transpose-local-array._solutioncpp`` and
``RAJA/exercises/launch-matrix-transpose-local-array_solution.cpp`` contain
complete working code for the examples. You can use the solution files to
check your work and for guidance if you get stuck. To build
the exercises execute ``make (kernel/launch)-matrix-transpose-local-array`` and ``make (kernel/launch)-matrix-transpose-local-array_solution``
from the build directory.

Key RAJA features shown in this example are:

  * ``RAJA::kernel_param`` method and execution policy usage with multiple lambda expressions
  * ``RAJA::statement::Tile`` type for loop tiling
  * ``RAJA::statement::ForICount`` type for generating local tile indices
  * ``RAJA::LocalArray`` type for thread-local tile memory arrays
  * ``RAJA::launch`` kernel execution interface
  * ``RAJA::expt::tile`` type for loop tiling
  * ``RAJA::expt::loop_icount`` method to generate local tile indices for Launch
  * ``RAJA_TEAM_SHARED`` macro for thread-local tile memory arrays

As in :ref:`tiledmatrixtranspose-label`, this example computes the transpose 
of an input matrix :math:`A` of size :math:`N_r \times N_c` and stores the 
result in a second matrix :math:`At` of size :math:`N_c \times N_r`. The 
operation uses a local memory tiling algorithm. The algorithm tiles the outer 
loops and iterates over tiles in inner loops. The algorithm first loads 
input matrix entries into a local two-dimensional array for a tile, and then 
reads from the tile swapping the row and column indices to generate the output 
matrix. 

We choose tile dimensions smaller than the dimensions of the matrix and note 
that it is not necessary for the tile dimensions to divide evenly the number
of rows and columns in the matrix. As in the :ref:`tiledmatrixtranspose-label`
example, we start by defining the number of rows and columns in the matrices, 
the tile dimensions, and the number of tiles.

.. literalinclude:: ../../../../exercises/kernel-matrix-transpose-local-array_solution.cpp
   :start-after: // _mattranspose_localarray_dims_start
   :end-before: // _mattranspose_localarray_dims_end
   :language: C++

We also use RAJA View objects to simplify the multi-dimensional indexing
as in the :ref:`tiledmatrixtranspose-label` example.

.. literalinclude:: ../../../../exercises/kernel-matrix-transpose-local-array_solution.cpp
   :start-after: // _mattranspose_localarray_views_start
   :end-before: // _mattranspose_localarray_views_end
   :language: C++

The complete sequential C-style implementation of the tiled transpose operation 
using a stack-allocated local array for the tiles is:

.. literalinclude:: ../../../../exercises/kernel-matrix-transpose-local-array_solution.cpp
   :start-after: // _mattranspose_localarray_cstyle_start
   :end-before: // _mattranspose_localarray_cstyle_end
   :language: C++

.. note:: * To prevent indexing out of bounds, when the tile dimensions do not
            divide evenly the matrix dimensions, we use a bounds check in the
            inner loops.
          * For efficiency, we order the inner loops so that reading from
            the input matrix and writing to the output matrix both use
            stride-1 data access.

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
``RAJA::kernel`` Variants
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The ``RAJA::kernel`` interface provides mechanisms to tile loops and use 
*local arrays* in kernels so that algorithm patterns like the C-style kernel 
above can be implemented with RAJA. When using ``RAJA::kernel``, a 
``RAJA::LocalArray`` type specifies an object whose memory is created inside 
a kernel using a statement type in a RAJA kernel execution policy. The local 
array data is only usable within the kernel. See :ref:`local_array-label` for 
more information. 

``RAJA::kernel`` methods also support loop tiling statements which determine 
the number of tiles needed to perform an operation based on tile size and
extent of the corresponding iteration space. Moreover, lambda expressions for
the kernel will not be invoked for iterations outside the bounds of an 
iteration space when tile dimensions do not divide evenly the size of the
iteration space; thus, no conditional checks on loop bounds are needed
inside inner loops.

For the RAJA version of the matrix transpose kernel above, we define the
type of the ``RAJA::LocalArray`` used for matrix entries in a tile and
create an object to represent it: 

.. literalinclude:: ../../../../exercises/kernel-matrix-transpose-local-array_solution.cpp
   :start-after: // _mattranspose_localarray_start
   :end-before: // _mattranspose_localarray_end
   :language: C++

The template parameters that define the type are: the array data type, the 
data stride permutation for the array indices (here the identity permutation 
is given, so the default RAJA conventions apply; i.e., the rightmost array 
index will be stride-1), and the array dimensions. Next, we compare two 
``RAJA::kernel`` implementations of the matrix transpose operation.

The complete RAJA sequential CPU variant with kernel execution policy and 
kernel is:

.. literalinclude:: ../../../../exercises/kernel-matrix-transpose-local-array_solution.cpp
   :start-after: // _mattranspose_localarray_raja_start
   :end-before: // _mattranspose_localarray_raja_end
   :language: C++

In the execution policy, the ``RAJA::statement::Tile`` types define
tiling of the outer 'row' (iteration space tuple index '1') and 'col' 
(iteration space tuple index '0') loops, as well as tile sizes 
(``RAJA::tile_fixed`` types) and loop execution policies. Next, 
the ``RAJA::statement::InitLocalMem`` type allocates the local tile array
based on the memory policy type (here, we use ``RAJA::cpu_tile_mem`` for
a CPU stack-allocated array). The ``RAJA::ParamList<2>`` parameter indicates 
that the local array object is associated with position '2' in the parameter 
tuple argument passed to the ``RAJA::kernel_param`` method. The first two
entries in the parameter tuple indicate storage for the local tile indices 
that are used in the two lambda expressions that comprise the kernel body.
Finally, we have two sets of nested inner loops for reading the input matrix 
entries into the local tile array and writing them out to the output matrix 
transpose. The inner bodies of each of these loop nests are identified by 
lambda expression invocation statements ``RAJA::statement::Lambda<0>`` for
the first lambda passed as an argument to the ``RAJA::kernel_param`` method
and ``RAJA::statement::Lambda<1>`` for the second lambda argument.

Note that the loops within tiles use ``RAJA::statement::ForICount`` types 
rather than ``RAJA::statement::For`` types that we saw in the 
tiled matrix transpose example in :ref:`tiledmatrixtranspose-label`.
The ``RAJA::statement::ForICount`` type generates local tile indices that 
are passed to lambda loop body expressions to index into the local tile
memory array. As the reader will observe, there is no local tile index 
computation needed in the lambdas for the RAJA version of the kernel as a 
result. The first integer template parameter for each 
``RAJA::statement::ForICount`` type indicates the item in the iteration space 
tuple passed to the ``RAJA::kernel_param`` method to which it applies. 
The second template parameter for each 
``RAJA::statement::ForICount`` type indicates the position in the parameter 
tuple passed to the ``RAJA::kernel_param`` method that will hold the 
associated local tile index. For more detailed discussion of RAJA loop tiling 
statement types, please see :ref:`tiling-label`.

Now that we have described the execution policy in some detail, let's pull 
everything together by briefly walking though the call to the 
``RAJA::kernel_param`` method, which is similar to ``RAJA::kernel`` but takes
additional arguments needed to execute the operations involving local
tile indices and the local memory array. The first argument is a tuple of 
iteration spaces that define the iteration ranges for the levels in the loop 
nest. Again, the first integer parameters given to the ``RAJA::statement::Tile``
and ``RAJA::statement::ForICount`` types identify the tuple entry to which 
they apply. The second argument::

  RAJA::make_tuple((int)0, (int)0, Tile_Array)

is a tuple of data parameters that will hold the local tile indices and 
``RAJA::LocalArray`` tile memory. The tuple entries are 
associated with various statements in the execution policy as we described
earlier. Next, two lambda expression arguments are passed to the 
``RAJA::kernel_param`` method for reading and writing the input and output 
matrix entries, respectively.

.. note:: ``RAJA::kernel_param`` accepts a parameter tuple argument after
          the iteration space tuple, which enables the parameters to be 
          used in multiple lambda expressions in a kernel.

In the kernel, both lambda expressions take the same five arguments. The first 
two are the matrix global column and row indices associated with the iteration 
space tuple. The next three arguments correspond to the parameter tuple entries.
The first two of these are the local tile indices used to access entries in the 
``RAJA::LocalArray`` object memory. The last argument is a reference to the 
``RAJA::LocalArray`` object itself.

The next ``RAJA::kernel_param`` variant we present works the same as the one 
above. It is different from the previous version since we include 
additional template parameters in the ``RAJA::statement::Lambda`` types to 
indicate which arguments each lambda expression takes and in which order. 
Here is the complete version including execution policy and kernel:

.. literalinclude:: ../../../../exercises/kernel-matrix-transpose-local-array_solution.cpp
   :start-after: // _raja_mattranspose_lambdaargs_start
   :end-before: // _raja_mattranspose_lambdaargs_start
   :language: C++

Here, the two ``RAJA::statement::Lambda`` types in the execution policy show
two different ways to specify the segments (``RAJA::Segs``) 
associated with the matrix column and row indices. That is, we can use a 
``Segs`` statement for each argument, or include multiple segment ids in one
statement. 

Note that we are using ``RAJA::statement::For`` types for the inner tile
loops instead of `RAJA::statement::ForICount`` types used in the first variant.
As a consequence of specifying lambda arguments, there are two main differences.
The local tile indices are properly computed and passed to the lambda 
expressions as a result of the ``RAJA::Offsets`` types that appear
in the lambda statement types. The ``RAJA::statement::Lambda`` type for each
lambda shows the two ways to specify the local tile index arguments; we can 
use an ``Offsets`` statement for each argument, or include multiple segment 
ids in one statement. Lastly, there is only one entry in the parameter
tuple in this case, the local tile array. The placeholders in the
previous example are not needed.

.. note:: In this example, we need all five arguments in each lambda 
          expression so the lambda expression argument lists are 
          the same. Another use case for the template parameter argument
          specification described here is to be able to pass only the
          arguments used in a lambda expression. In particular when we use
          multiple lambda expressions to represent a kernel, each lambda
          can have a different argument lists from the others.

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
``RAJA::expt::launch`` Variants
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The ``RAJA::expt::launch`` interface provides mechanisms to tile loops and use 
*local arrays* in kernels to support algorithm patterns like the C-style kernel 
above. When, using ``RAJA::expt::launch``, the ``RAJA_TEAM_SHARED`` macro is
used to create a GPU shared memory array or a CPU stack memory array inside
a kernel.

``RAJA::expt::launch`` support methods for tiling over an iteration space
using ``RAJA::expt::tile`` and ``RAJA::expt::loop_icount`` methods to tile
loops and generate global iteration indices and local tile offsets.
Moreover, lambda expressions for these methods will not be invoked for
iterations outside the bounds of an iteration space when tile dimensions
do not divide evenly the size of the iteration space; thus, no conditional
checks on loop bounds are needed inside inner loops.

A complete RAJA sequential CPU variant with kernel execution policy and 
kernel is:

.. literalinclude:: ../../../../exercises/launch-matrix-transpose-local-array_solution.cpp
   :start-after: // _mattranspose_localarray_raja_start
   :end-before: // _mattranspose_localarray_raja_end
   :language: C++

Here, the ``RAJA::expt::tile`` method is used to create tilings of the outer 
'row' and 'col' iteration spaces. The ``RAJA::expt::tile`` method
takes an additional argument specifying the tile size for the corresponding 
loop. To traverse the tile, we use the ``RAJA::expt::loop_icount`` method, 
which is similar to the ``RAJA::ForICount`` statement used in a 
``RAJA::kernel`` execution policy as shown above. A 
``RAJA::expt::loop_icount`` method call
will generate local tile index associated with the outer global index.
The local tile index is necessary as we use it to read and write entries 
from/to global memory to ``RAJA_TEAM_SHARED`` memory array.
