docs/sphinx/user_guide/tutorial/view_layout.rst, before:

.. ##
.. ## Copyright (c) 2016-22, Lawrence Livermore National Security, LLC
.. ## and RAJA project contributors. See the RAJA/LICENSE file
.. ## for details.
.. ##
.. ## SPDX-License-Identifier: (BSD-3-Clause)
.. ##

.. _view_layout-label:

-----------------------------------------------------------
RAJA Views and Layouts
-----------------------------------------------------------

This section contains an exercise file ``RAJA/exercises/view-layout.cpp``
for you to work through if you wish to get some practice with RAJA. The
file ``RAJA/exercises/view-layout_solution.cpp`` contains complete
working code for the examples discussed in this section. You can use the
solution file to check your work and for guidance if you get stuck.

Key RAJA features shown in this section are:

  * ``RAJA::View`` 
  * ``RAJA::Layout`` and ``RAJA::OffsetLayout`` constructs 
  * Layout permutations

The examples in this section illustrate RAJA View and Layout concepts
and usage patterns. The goal is for you to gain an understanding of how
to use RAJA Views and Layouts to simplify and transform array data access
patterns. None of the examples use RAJA kernel execution methods, such
as ``RAJA::forall``. The intent is to focus on RAJA View and Layout mechanics.

Consider a basic C-style implementation of a matrix-matrix multiplication
operation, using :math:`N \times N` matrices:

.. literalinclude:: ../../../../exercises/view-layout_solution.cpp
   :start-after: _cstyle_matmult_start
   :end-before: _cstyle_matmult_end
   :language: C++

As is commonly done for efficiency in C and C++, we have allocated the data 
for the matrices as one-dimensional arrays. Thus, we need to manually compute 
the data pointer offsets for the row and column indices in the kernel.
Here, we use the array ``Cref`` to hold a reference solution matrix that
we use to compare with results generated by the examples below. 

To simplify the multi-dimensional indexing, we can use ``RAJA::View`` objects,
which we define as:

.. literalinclude:: ../../../../exercises/view-layout_solution.cpp
   :start-after: _matmult_views_start
   :end-before: _matmult_views_end
   :language: C++

Here we define three ``RAJA::View`` objects, 'Aview', 'Bview', and 'Cview',
that *wrap* the array data pointers, 'A', 'B', and 'C', respectively. We 
pass a data pointer as the first argument to each view constructor and then 
the extent of each matrix dimension as the second and third arguments. There
are two extent arguments since we indicate in the ``RAJA::Layout`` template
parameter list. The matrices are square and each extent is 'N'. Here, the 
template parameters to ``RAJA::View`` are the array data type 'double' and 
a ``RAJA::Layout`` type. Specifically::

  RAJA::Layout<2, int>

means that each View represents a two-dimensional default data layout, and 
that we will use values of type 'int' to index into the arrays. 

Using the ``RAJA::View`` objects, we can access the data entries for the rows 
and columns using a more natural, less error-prone syntax:

.. literalinclude:: ../../../../exercises/view-layout_solution.cpp
   :start-after: _cstyle_matmult_views_start
   :end-before: _cstyle_matmult_views_end
   :language: C++

Default Layouts Use Row-major Ordering
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The default data layout ordering in RAJA is *row-major*, which is the 
convention for multi-dimensional array indexing in C and C++. This means that 
the rightmost index will be stride-1, the index to the left of the rightmost 
index will have stride equal to the extent of the rightmost dimension, and
so on.

.. note:: RAJA Layouts and Views support any number of dimensions and
          the default data access ordering is *row-major*. Please
          see :ref:`view-label` for more details.

To illustrate the default data layout striding, we next show simple
one-, two-, and three-dimensional examples where the for-loop ordering 
for the different dimensions is such that all data access is stride-1. We 
begin by defining some dimensions, allocate and initialize arrays:

.. literalinclude:: ../../../../exercises/view-layout_solution.cpp
   :start-after: _default_views_init_start
   :end-before: _default_views_init_end
   :language: C++

The version of the array initialization kernel using a one-dimensional 
``RAJA::View`` is:

.. literalinclude:: ../../../../exercises/view-layout_solution.cpp
   :start-after: _default_view1D_start
   :end-before: _default_view1D_end
   :language: C++

The version of the array initialization using a two-dimensional 
``RAJA::View`` is:

.. literalinclude:: ../../../../exercises/view-layout_solution.cpp
   :start-after: _default_view2D_start
   :end-before: _default_view2D_end
   :language: C++

The three-dimensional version is: 

.. literalinclude:: ../../../../exercises/view-layout_solution.cpp
   :start-after: _default_view3D_start
   :end-before: _default_view3D_end
   :language: C++

It's worth repeating that the data array access in all three variants shown
here using ``RAJA::View`` objects is stride-1 since we order the for-loops
in the loop nests to match the row-major ordering.

RAJA Layout types support other data access patterns with different striding 
orders, offsets, and permutations. To this point, we have used the default 
Layout constructor. RAJA provides methods to generate Layouts for different 
indexing patterns. We describe these in the next several sections. Next, we 
show how to permute the data striding order using permuted Layouts.

Permuted Layouts Change Data Striding Order
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Every ``RAJA::Layout`` object has a permutation. When a permutation is not 
specified at creation, a Layout will use the identity permutation. Here are
examples where the identity permutation is explicitly provided. First, in
two dimensions:

.. literalinclude:: ../../../../exercises/view-layout_solution.cpp
   :start-after: _default_perm_view2D_start
   :end-before: _default_perm_view2D_end
   :language: C++

Then, in three dimensions:

.. literalinclude:: ../../../../exercises/view-layout_solution.cpp
   :start-after: _default_perm_view3D_start
   :end-before: _default_perm_view3D_end
   :language: C++

These two examples access the data with stride-1 ordering, the same as in
the earlier examples, which is shown by the nested loop ordering.  
The identity permutation in two dimensions is '{0, 1}' and is '{0, 1, 2}'
for three dimensions. The method ``RAJA::make_permuted_layout`` is used to 
create a ``RAJA::Layout`` object with a permutation. The method takes two 
arguments, the extents of each dimension and the permutation.

.. note:: If a permuted Layout is created with the *identity permutation*
          (e.g., {0,1,2}), the Layout is the same as if it were created by

Next, we permute the striding order for the two-dimensional example:

.. literalinclude:: ../../../../exercises/view-layout_solution.cpp
   :start-after: _perm_2D_start
   :end-before: _perm_2D_end
   :language: C++

Read from right to left, the permutation '{1, 0}' specifies that the first
(zero) index 'i' is stride-1 and the second index (one) 'j' has stride equal 
to the extent of the first Layout dimension 'Nx'. This is evident in the 
for-loop ordering.

Here is the three-dimensional case, where we have reversed the striding order
using the permutation '{2, 1, 0}':

.. literalinclude:: ../../../../exercises/view-layout_solution.cpp
   :start-after: _perma_view3D_start
   :end-before: _perma_view3D_end
   :language: C++

The data access remains stride-1 due to the for-loop reordering. For fun, 
here is another three-dimensional permutation:

.. literalinclude:: ../../../../exercises/view-layout_solution.cpp
   :start-after: _permb_view3D_start
   :end-before: _permb_view3D_end
   :language: C++

The permutation is '{1, 2, 0}' so to make the data access stride-1, we
swap the 'j' and 'k' loops and leave the 'i' loop as the inner loop.

Multi-dimensional Indices and Linear Indices
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

``RAJA::Layout`` types provide methods to convert between linear indices and
multi-dimensional indices and vice versa. Recall the Layout 'perm3a_layout' 
from above that was created with the permutation '{2, 1, 0}'. To get the 
linear index corresponding to the index triple '(1, 2, 0)', you can do
this::

  int lin = perm3a_layout(1, 2, 0);

The value of 'lin' is 7 = 1 + 2 * Nx + 0 * Nx * Ny. To get the index triple
for linear index 7, you can do::

  int i, j, k;
  perm3a_layout.toIndices(7, i, j, k);

This sets 'i' to 1, 'j' to 2, and 'k' to 0.  

Similarly for the Layout 'permb_layout', which was created with the 
permutation '{1, 2, 0}'::

  lin = perm3b_layout(1, 2, 0); 

sets 'lin' to 13 = 1 + 0 * Nx + 2 * Nx * Nz and::

  perm3b_layout.toIndices(13, i, j, k);

sets 'i' to 1, 'j' to 2, and 'k' to 0.

There are more examples in the exercise file associated with this section. 
Feel free to experiment with them.

One important item to note is that, by default, there is no bounds checking
on indices passed to a ``RAJA::View`` data access method or ``RAJA::Layout``
index computation methods. Therefore, it is the responsibility of a user 
to ensure that indices passed to ``RAJA::View`` and ``RAJA::Layoout`` 
methods are in bounds to avoid accessing data outside 
of the View or computing invalid indices. 

.. note:: RAJA provides a CMake variable ``RAJA_ENABLE_BOUNDS_CHECK`` to 
          turn run time bounds checking on or off when the code is compiled.
          Enabling bounds checking is useful for debugging and to ensure
          your code is correct. However, when enabled, bounds checking adds
          noticeable run time overhead. So it should not be enabled for
          a production build of your code. 
   
Offset Layouts Apply Offsets to Indices
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The last topic we cover in this exercise is the ``RAJA::OffsetLayout`` type.
We first illustrate the concept of an offset with a C-style for-loop:

.. literalinclude:: ../../../../exercises/view-layout_solution.cpp
   :start-after: _cstyle_offlayout1D_start
   :end-before: _cstyle_offlayout1D_end
   :language: C++

Here, the for-loop runs from 'imin' to 'imax-1' (i.e., -5 to 5). To avoid 
out-of-bounds negative indexing, we subtract 'imin' (i.e., -5) from the loop 
index 'i'. 

To do the same thing with RAJA, we create a ``RAJA::OffsetLayout`` object
and use it to index into the array:

.. literalinclude:: ../../../../exercises/view-layout_solution.cpp
   :start-after: _raja_offlayout1D_start
   :end-before: _raja_offlayout1D_end
   :language: C++

``RAJA::OffsetLayout`` is a different type than ``RAJA::Layout`` because
it contains offset information. The arguments to the 
``RAJA::make_offset_layout`` method are the index bounds.

As expected, the two dimensional case is similar. First, a C-style loop:

.. literalinclude:: ../../../../exercises/view-layout_solution.cpp
   :start-after: _cstyle_offlayout2D_start
   :end-before: _cstyle_offlayout2D_end
   :language: C++

and then the same operation using a ``RAJA::OffsetLayout`` object:

.. literalinclude:: ../../../../exercises/view-layout_solution.cpp
   :start-after: _raja_offlayout2D_start
   :end-before: _raja_offlayout2D_end
   :language: C++

Note that the first argument passed to ``RAJA::make_offset_layout`` contains
the lower bounds for 'i' and 'j' and the second argument contains the upper
bounds. Also, the 'j' index is stride-1 by default since we did not pass
a permutation to the ``RAJA::make_offset_layout`` method, which is the same 
as the non-offset Layout usage.

Just like ``RAJA::Layout`` has a permutation, so does ``RAJA::OffsetLayout``.
Here is an example where we permute the (i, j) index stride ordering:

.. literalinclude:: ../../../../exercises/view-layout_solution.cpp
   :start-after: _raja_permofflayout2D_start
   :end-before: _raja_permofflayout2D_end
   :language: C++ 

The permutation '{1, 0}' is passed as the third argument to 
``RAJA::make_offset_layout``. From the ordering of the for-loops, we can see 
that the 'i' index is stride-1 and the 'j' index has stride equal to the 
extent of the 'i' dimension so the for-loop nest strides through 
the data with unit stride.

Commit message:

Adding a note to each exercise on how to build appropriate targets.

docs/sphinx/user_guide/tutorial/view_layout.rst, after:

.. ##
.. ## Copyright (c) 2016-22, Lawrence Livermore National Security, LLC
.. ## and RAJA project contributors. See the RAJA/LICENSE file
.. ## for details.
.. ##
.. ## SPDX-License-Identifier: (BSD-3-Clause)
.. ##

.. _view_layout-label:

-----------------------------------------------------------
RAJA Views and Layouts
-----------------------------------------------------------

This section contains an exercise file ``RAJA/exercises/view-layout.cpp``
for you to work through if you wish to get some practice with RAJA. The
file ``RAJA/exercises/view-layout_solution.cpp`` contains complete
working code for the examples discussed in this section. You can use the
solution file to check your work and for guidance if you get stuck. To build
the exercises execute ``make view-layout`` and ``make view-layout_solution``
from the build directory.

Key RAJA features shown in this section are:

  * ``RAJA::View`` 
  * ``RAJA::Layout`` and ``RAJA::OffsetLayout`` constructs 
  * Layout permutations

The examples in this section illustrate RAJA View and Layout concepts
and usage patterns. The goal is for you to gain an understanding of how
to use RAJA Views and Layouts to simplify and transform array data access
patterns. None of the examples use RAJA kernel execution methods, such
as ``RAJA::forall``. The intent is to focus on RAJA View and Layout mechanics.

Consider a basic C-style implementation of a matrix-matrix multiplication
operation, using :math:`N \times N` matrices:

.. literalinclude:: ../../../../exercises/view-layout_solution.cpp
   :start-after: _cstyle_matmult_start
   :end-before: _cstyle_matmult_end
   :language: C++

As is commonly done for efficiency in C and C++, we have allocated the data 
for the matrices as one-dimensional arrays. Thus, we need to manually compute 
the data pointer offsets for the row and column indices in the kernel.
Here, we use the array ``Cref`` to hold a reference solution matrix that
we use to compare with results generated by the examples below. 

To simplify the multi-dimensional indexing, we can use ``RAJA::View`` objects,
which we define as:

.. literalinclude:: ../../../../exercises/view-layout_solution.cpp
   :start-after: _matmult_views_start
   :end-before: _matmult_views_end
   :language: C++

Here we define three ``RAJA::View`` objects, 'Aview', 'Bview', and 'Cview',
that *wrap* the array data pointers, 'A', 'B', and 'C', respectively. We 
pass a data pointer as the first argument to each view constructor and then 
the extent of each matrix dimension as the second and third arguments. There
are two extent arguments since we indicate in the ``RAJA::Layout`` template
parameter list. The matrices are square and each extent is 'N'. Here, the 
template parameters to ``RAJA::View`` are the array data type 'double' and 
a ``RAJA::Layout`` type. Specifically::

  RAJA::Layout<2, int>

means that each View represents a two-dimensional default data layout, and 
that we will use values of type 'int' to index into the arrays. 

Using the ``RAJA::View`` objects, we can access the data entries for the rows 
and columns using a more natural, less error-prone syntax:

.. literalinclude:: ../../../../exercises/view-layout_solution.cpp
   :start-after: _cstyle_matmult_views_start
   :end-before: _cstyle_matmult_views_end
   :language: C++

Default Layouts Use Row-major Ordering
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The default data layout ordering in RAJA is *row-major*, which is the 
convention for multi-dimensional array indexing in C and C++. This means that 
the rightmost index will be stride-1, the index to the left of the rightmost 
index will have stride equal to the extent of the rightmost dimension, and
so on.

.. note:: RAJA Layouts and Views support any number of dimensions and
          the default data access ordering is *row-major*. Please
          see :ref:`view-label` for more details.

To illustrate the default data layout striding, we next show simple
one-, two-, and three-dimensional examples where the for-loop ordering 
for the different dimensions is such that all data access is stride-1. We 
begin by defining some dimensions, allocate and initialize arrays:

.. literalinclude:: ../../../../exercises/view-layout_solution.cpp
   :start-after: _default_views_init_start
   :end-before: _default_views_init_end
   :language: C++

The version of the array initialization kernel using a one-dimensional 
``RAJA::View`` is:

.. literalinclude:: ../../../../exercises/view-layout_solution.cpp
   :start-after: _default_view1D_start
   :end-before: _default_view1D_end
   :language: C++

The version of the array initialization using a two-dimensional 
``RAJA::View`` is:

.. literalinclude:: ../../../../exercises/view-layout_solution.cpp
   :start-after: _default_view2D_start
   :end-before: _default_view2D_end
   :language: C++

The three-dimensional version is: 

.. literalinclude:: ../../../../exercises/view-layout_solution.cpp
   :start-after: _default_view3D_start
   :end-before: _default_view3D_end
   :language: C++

It's worth repeating that the data array access in all three variants shown
here using ``RAJA::View`` objects is stride-1 since we order the for-loops
in the loop nests to match the row-major ordering.

RAJA Layout types support other data access patterns with different striding 
orders, offsets, and permutations. To this point, we have used the default 
Layout constructor. RAJA provides methods to generate Layouts for different 
indexing patterns. We describe these in the next several sections. Next, we 
show how to permute the data striding order using permuted Layouts.

Permuted Layouts Change Data Striding Order
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Every ``RAJA::Layout`` object has a permutation. When a permutation is not 
specified at creation, a Layout will use the identity permutation. Here are
examples where the identity permutation is explicitly provided. First, in
two dimensions:

.. literalinclude:: ../../../../exercises/view-layout_solution.cpp
   :start-after: _default_perm_view2D_start
   :end-before: _default_perm_view2D_end
   :language: C++

Then, in three dimensions:

.. literalinclude:: ../../../../exercises/view-layout_solution.cpp
   :start-after: _default_perm_view3D_start
   :end-before: _default_perm_view3D_end
   :language: C++

These two examples access the data with stride-1 ordering, the same as in
the earlier examples, which is shown by the nested loop ordering.  
The identity permutation in two dimensions is '{0, 1}' and is '{0, 1, 2}'
for three dimensions. The method ``RAJA::make_permuted_layout`` is used to 
create a ``RAJA::Layout`` object with a permutation. The method takes two 
arguments, the extents of each dimension and the permutation.

.. note:: If a permuted Layout is created with the *identity permutation*
          (e.g., {0,1,2}), the Layout is the same as if it were created by

Next, we permute the striding order for the two-dimensional example:

.. literalinclude:: ../../../../exercises/view-layout_solution.cpp
   :start-after: _perm_2D_start
   :end-before: _perm_2D_end
   :language: C++

Read from right to left, the permutation '{1, 0}' specifies that the first
(zero) index 'i' is stride-1 and the second index (one) 'j' has stride equal 
to the extent of the first Layout dimension 'Nx'. This is evident in the 
for-loop ordering.

Here is the three-dimensional case, where we have reversed the striding order
using the permutation '{2, 1, 0}':

.. literalinclude:: ../../../../exercises/view-layout_solution.cpp
   :start-after: _perma_view3D_start
   :end-before: _perma_view3D_end
   :language: C++

The data access remains stride-1 due to the for-loop reordering. For fun, 
here is another three-dimensional permutation:

.. literalinclude:: ../../../../exercises/view-layout_solution.cpp
   :start-after: _permb_view3D_start
   :end-before: _permb_view3D_end
   :language: C++

The permutation is '{1, 2, 0}' so to make the data access stride-1, we
swap the 'j' and 'k' loops and leave the 'i' loop as the inner loop.

Multi-dimensional Indices and Linear Indices
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

``RAJA::Layout`` types provide methods to convert between linear indices and
multi-dimensional indices and vice versa. Recall the Layout 'perm3a_layout' 
from above that was created with the permutation '{2, 1, 0}'. To get the 
linear index corresponding to the index triple '(1, 2, 0)', you can do
this::

  int lin = perm3a_layout(1, 2, 0);

The value of 'lin' is 7 = 1 + 2 * Nx + 0 * Nx * Ny. To get the index triple
for linear index 7, you can do::

  int i, j, k;
  perm3a_layout.toIndices(7, i, j, k);

This sets 'i' to 1, 'j' to 2, and 'k' to 0.  

Similarly for the Layout 'permb_layout', which was created with the 
permutation '{1, 2, 0}'::

  lin = perm3b_layout(1, 2, 0); 

sets 'lin' to 13 = 1 + 0 * Nx + 2 * Nx * Nz and::

  perm3b_layout.toIndices(13, i, j, k);

sets 'i' to 1, 'j' to 2, and 'k' to 0.

There are more examples in the exercise file associated with this section. 
Feel free to experiment with them.

One important item to note is that, by default, there is no bounds checking
on indices passed to a ``RAJA::View`` data access method or ``RAJA::Layout``
index computation methods. Therefore, it is the responsibility of a user 
to ensure that indices passed to ``RAJA::View`` and ``RAJA::Layoout`` 
methods are in bounds to avoid accessing data outside 
of the View or computing invalid indices. 

.. note:: RAJA provides a CMake variable ``RAJA_ENABLE_BOUNDS_CHECK`` to 
          turn run time bounds checking on or off when the code is compiled.
          Enabling bounds checking is useful for debugging and to ensure
          your code is correct. However, when enabled, bounds checking adds
          noticeable run time overhead. So it should not be enabled for
          a production build of your code. 
   
Offset Layouts Apply Offsets to Indices
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The last topic we cover in this exercise is the ``RAJA::OffsetLayout`` type.
We first illustrate the concept of an offset with a C-style for-loop:

.. literalinclude:: ../../../../exercises/view-layout_solution.cpp
   :start-after: _cstyle_offlayout1D_start
   :end-before: _cstyle_offlayout1D_end
   :language: C++

Here, the for-loop runs from 'imin' to 'imax-1' (i.e., -5 to 5). To avoid 
out-of-bounds negative indexing, we subtract 'imin' (i.e., -5) from the loop 
index 'i'. 

To do the same thing with RAJA, we create a ``RAJA::OffsetLayout`` object
and use it to index into the array:

.. literalinclude:: ../../../../exercises/view-layout_solution.cpp
   :start-after: _raja_offlayout1D_start
   :end-before: _raja_offlayout1D_end
   :language: C++

``RAJA::OffsetLayout`` is a different type than ``RAJA::Layout`` because
it contains offset information. The arguments to the 
``RAJA::make_offset_layout`` method are the index bounds.

As expected, the two dimensional case is similar. First, a C-style loop:

.. literalinclude:: ../../../../exercises/view-layout_solution.cpp
   :start-after: _cstyle_offlayout2D_start
   :end-before: _cstyle_offlayout2D_end
   :language: C++

and then the same operation using a ``RAJA::OffsetLayout`` object:

.. literalinclude:: ../../../../exercises/view-layout_solution.cpp
   :start-after: _raja_offlayout2D_start
   :end-before: _raja_offlayout2D_end
   :language: C++

Note that the first argument passed to ``RAJA::make_offset_layout`` contains
the lower bounds for 'i' and 'j' and the second argument contains the upper
bounds. Also, the 'j' index is stride-1 by default since we did not pass
a permutation to the ``RAJA::make_offset_layout`` method, which is the same 
as the non-offset Layout usage.

Just like ``RAJA::Layout`` has a permutation, so does ``RAJA::OffsetLayout``.
Here is an example where we permute the (i, j) index stride ordering:

.. literalinclude:: ../../../../exercises/view-layout_solution.cpp
   :start-after: _raja_permofflayout2D_start
   :end-before: _raja_permofflayout2D_end
   :language: C++ 

The permutation '{1, 0}' is passed as the third argument to 
``RAJA::make_offset_layout``. From the ordering of the for-loops, we can see 
that the 'i' index is stride-1 and the 'j' index has stride equal to the 
extent of the 'i' dimension so the for-loop nest strides through 
the data with unit stride.
