docs/sphinx/user_guide/feature/local_array.rst, before:

.. ##
.. ## Copyright (c) 2016-22, Lawrence Livermore National Security, LLC
.. ## and other RAJA project contributors. See the RAJA/LICENSE file
.. ## for details.
.. ##
.. ## SPDX-License-Identifier: (BSD-3-Clause)
.. ##

.. _local_array-label:

===========
Local Array
===========

This section introduces RAJA *local arrays*. A ``RAJA::LocalArray`` is an
array object with one or more dimensions whose memory is allocated when a 
RAJA kernel is executed and only lives within the scope of the kernel 
execution. To motivate the concept and usage, consider a simple C++ example
in which we construct and use two arrays in nested loops::

           for(int k = 0; k < 7; ++k) { //k loop

            int a_array[7][5];
            int b_array[5];

             for(int j = 0; j < 5; ++j) { //j loop
               a_array[k][j] = 5*k + j;
               b_array[j] = 7*j + k;
             }

             for(int j = 0; j < 5; ++j) { //j loop
               printf("%d %d \n",a_array[k][j], b_array[j]);
             }

           }

Here, two stack-allocated arrays are defined inside the outer 'k' loop and 
used in both inner 'j' loops. This loop pattern may be also be expressed 
using RAJA local arrays in a ``RAJA::kernel_param`` kernel. We show a 
RAJA variant below, which matches the implementation above, and then discuss 
its constituent parts::

  // 
  // Define two local arrays
  // 

  using RAJA_a_array = RAJA::LocalArray<int, RAJA::Perm<0, 1>, RAJA::SizeList<5,7> >;
  RAJA_a_array kernel_a_array;

  using RAJA_b_array = RAJA::LocalArray<int, RAJA::Perm<0>, RAJA::SizeList<5> >;
  RAJA_b_array kernel_b_array;


  // 
  // Define the kernel execution policy
  // 

  using POL = RAJA::KernelPolicy<
                RAJA::statement::For<1, RAJA::loop_exec,
                  RAJA::statement::InitLocalMem<RAJA::cpu_tile_mem, RAJA::ParamList<0, 1>,
                    RAJA::statement::For<0, RAJA::loop_exec,
                      RAJA::statement::Lambda<0>
                    >,
                    RAJA::statement::For<0, RAJA::loop_exec,
                      RAJA::statement::Lambda<1>
                    >
                  >
                >
              >;


  // 
  // Define the kernel
  // 

  RAJA::kernel_param<POL> ( RAJA::make_tuple(RAJA::RangeSegment(0,5), 
                                             RAJA::RangeSegment(0,7)),
                            RAJA::make_tuple(kernel_a_array, kernel_b_array),

    [=] (int j, int k, RAJA_a_array& kernel_a_array, RAJA_b_array& kernel_b_array) {
      a_array(k, j) = 5*k + j;
      b_array(j) = 5*k + j;
    },

    [=] (int j, int k, RAJA_a_array& a_array, RAJA_b_array& b_array) {
      printf("%d %d \n", kernel_a_array(k, j), kernel_b_array(j));
    }

  );

The RAJA version defines two ``RAJA::LocalArray`` types, one 
two-dimensional and one one-dimensional and creates an instance of each type. 
The template arguments for the ``RAJA::LocalArray`` types are:

  * Array data type
  * Index permutation (see :ref:`feat-view-label` for more on RAJA permutations)
  * Array dimensions

.. note:: ``RAJA::LocalArray`` types support arbitrary dimensions and sizes.

The kernel policy is a two-level nested loop policy (see 
:ref:`loop_elements-kernel-label` for information about RAJA kernel policies) 
with a statement type ``RAJA::statement::InitLocalMem`` inserted between the 
nested for-loops which allocates the memory for the local arrays when the 
kernel executes.  The ``InitLocalMem`` statement type uses a 'CPU tile' memory 
type, for the two entries '0' and '1' in the kernel parameter tuple 
(second argument to ``RAJA::kernel_param``). Then, the inner initialization 
loop and inner print loop are run with the respective lambda bodies defined 
in the kernel.

-------------------
Memory Policies
-------------------

``RAJA::LocalArray`` supports CPU stack-allocated memory and CUDA GPU shared
memory and thread private memory. See :ref:`localarraypolicy-label` for a
discussion of available memory policies.

Commit message:

Proofread pass, make section labels consistent with others in docs.

docs/sphinx/user_guide/feature/local_array.rst, after:

.. ##
.. ## Copyright (c) 2016-22, Lawrence Livermore National Security, LLC
.. ## and other RAJA project contributors. See the RAJA/LICENSE file
.. ## for details.
.. ##
.. ## SPDX-License-Identifier: (BSD-3-Clause)
.. ##

.. _feat-local_array-label:

===========
Local Array
===========

This section introduces RAJA *local arrays*. A ``RAJA::LocalArray`` is an
array object with one or more dimensions whose memory is allocated when a 
RAJA kernel is executed and only lives within the scope of the kernel 
execution. To motivate the concept and usage, consider a simple C example
in which we construct and use two arrays in nested loops::

           for(int k = 0; k < 7; ++k) { //k loop

            int a_array[7][5];
            int b_array[5];

             for(int j = 0; j < 5; ++j) { //j loop
               a_array[k][j] = 5*k + j;
               b_array[j] = 7*j + k;
             }

             for(int j = 0; j < 5; ++j) { //j loop
               printf("%d %d \n",a_array[k][j], b_array[j]);
             }

           }

Here, two stack-allocated arrays are defined inside the outer 'k' loop and 
used in both inner 'j' loops. 

This loop pattern may be also be written using RAJA local arrays in a 
``RAJA::kernel_param`` kernel. We show this next, and then discuss 
its constituent parts::

  // 
  // Define two local arrays
  // 

  using RAJA_a_array = RAJA::LocalArray<int, RAJA::Perm<0, 1>, RAJA::SizeList<5,7> >;
  RAJA_a_array kernel_a_array;

  using RAJA_b_array = RAJA::LocalArray<int, RAJA::Perm<0>, RAJA::SizeList<5> >;
  RAJA_b_array kernel_b_array;


  // 
  // Define the kernel execution policy
  // 

  using POL = RAJA::KernelPolicy<
                RAJA::statement::For<1, RAJA::loop_exec,
                  RAJA::statement::InitLocalMem<RAJA::cpu_tile_mem, RAJA::ParamList<0, 1>,
                    RAJA::statement::For<0, RAJA::loop_exec,
                      RAJA::statement::Lambda<0>
                    >,
                    RAJA::statement::For<0, RAJA::loop_exec,
                      RAJA::statement::Lambda<1>
                    >
                  >
                >
              >;


  // 
  // Define the kernel
  // 

  RAJA::kernel_param<POL> ( RAJA::make_tuple(RAJA::TypedRangeSegment<int>(0,5),
                                             RAJA::TypedRangeSegment<int<(0,7)),
                            RAJA::make_tuple(kernel_a_array, kernel_b_array),

    [=] (int j, int k, RAJA_a_array& kernel_a_array, RAJA_b_array& kernel_b_array) {
      a_array(k, j) = 5*k + j;
      b_array(j) = 5*k + j;
    },

    [=] (int j, int k, RAJA_a_array& a_array, RAJA_b_array& b_array) {
      printf("%d %d \n", kernel_a_array(k, j), kernel_b_array(j));
    }

  );

The RAJA version defines two ``RAJA::LocalArray`` types, one 
two-dimensional and one one-dimensional and creates an instance of each type. 
The template arguments for the ``RAJA::LocalArray`` types are:

  * Array data type
  * Index striding order (see :ref:`feat-view-label` for details)
  * Array dimensions

The local array instances are passed to the kernel in a tuple after the 
iteration space tuple. 

The kernel policy is a two-level nested loop policy (see 
:ref:`loop_elements-kernel-label` for information about RAJA kernel policies) 
with a statement type ``RAJA::statement::InitLocalMem`` inserted between the 
nested 'For' statements, which allocates the memory for the local arrays when 
the kernel executes. The ``InitLocalMem`` statement type has two parameters.
One for the memory type ``RAJA::cpu_tile_mem``, and one for specifying which
parameter tuple entries correspond to the local arrays. The local
array initialization is done in the first lambda expression, and the local
array values are printed in the second lambda expression.

.. note:: ``RAJA::LocalArray`` types support arbitrary dimensions and extents
          in each dimension.

-------------------
Memory Policies
-------------------

``RAJA::LocalArray`` supports CPU stack-allocated memory and CUDA or HIP GPU 
shared memory and thread private memory. See :ref:`localarraypolicy-label` 
for a discussion of available memory policies.
