docs/sphinx/user_guide/feature/scan.rst, before:

.. ##
.. ## Copyright (c) 2016-22, Lawrence Livermore National Security, LLC
.. ## and other RAJA project contributors. See the RAJA/LICENSE file
.. ## for details.
.. ##
.. ## SPDX-License-Identifier: (BSD-3-Clause)
.. ##

.. _scan-label:

================
Scans
================

RAJA provides portable parallel scan operations, which are basic
parallel algorithm building blocks. They are described in this section.

A few important notes:

.. note:: * All RAJA scan operations are in the namespace ``RAJA``.
          * Each RAJA scan operation is a template on an *execution policy*
            parameter. The same policy types used for ``RAJA::forall`` methods
            may be used for RAJA scans. Please see :ref:`policies-label`.
          * RAJA scan operations accept an optional *operator* argument so
            users can perform different types of scan operations. If
            no operator is given, the default is a 'plus' operation and
            the result is a **prefix-sum**.

Also:

.. note:: For scans using the CUDA or HIP back-end, RAJA implementation uses 
          the NVIDIA CUB library or AMD rocPRIM library, respectively. 
          Typically, the CMake variable ``CUB_DIR`` or ``ROCPRIM_DIR` will 
          be automatically set to the location of the CUB or rocPRIM library 
          for the CUDA or rocPRIM installation specified when either back-end
          is enabled. More details for configuring the CUB or rocPRIM library 
          with RAJA are available in the :ref:`getting_started-label` section.

Please see the following tutorial sections for detailed examples that use
RAJA scan operations:

 * :ref:`scan-label`.

-----------------
Scan Operations
-----------------

In general, a scan operation takes a sequence of numbers 'x' and a binary
associative operator 'op' as input and produces another sequence of
numbers 'y' as output. Each element of the output sequence is formed by
applying the operator to a subset of the input. Scans come in
two flavors: *inclusive* and *exclusive*.

An **inclusive scan** takes the input sequence

   x = { x\ :sub:`0`\, x\ :sub:`1`\, x\ :sub:`2`\, ... }

and calculates the output sequence:

   y = { y\ :sub:`0`\, y\ :sub:`1`\, y\ :sub:`2`\, ... }

using the recursive definition

   y\ :sub:`0`\ = x\ :sub:`0`

   y\ :sub:`i`\ = y\ :sub:`i-1`\ op x\ :sub:`i`\, for each i > 0

An **exclusive scan** is similar, but the output of an exclusive scan is
different from the output of an inclusive scan in two ways. First, the first
element of the output is the identity of the operator used. Second, the
rest of the output sequence is the same as inclusive scan, but shifted one
position to the right; i.e.,

   y\ :sub:`0`\ = op\ :sub:`identity`

   y\ :sub:`i`\ = y\ :sub:`i-1` op x\ :sub:`i-1`\, for each i > 0

If you would like more information about scan operations, a good overview of
what they are and why they are useful can be found in
`Blelloch Scan Lecture Notes <https://www.cs.cmu.edu/~blelloch/papers/Ble93.pdf>`_. A nice presentation that describes how parallel scans are implemented is `Va Tech Scan Lecture <http://people.cs.vt.edu/yongcao/teaching/cs5234/spring2013/slides/Lecture10.pdf>`_

---------------------
RAJA Inclusive Scans
---------------------

RAJA inclusive scan operations look like the following:

 * ``RAJA::inclusive_scan< exec_policy >(in_container, out_container)``
 * ``RAJA::inclusive_scan< exec_policy >(in_container, out_container, operator)``

Here, 'in_container' and 'out_container' are random access ranges of some
numeric scalar type whose elements are the input and output sequences of the
scan, respectively. The scalar type must be the same for both arrays. The first
scan operation above will be a *prefix-sum* since there is no operator argument
given; i.e., the output array will contain partial sums of the input array. The
second scan will apply the operator that is passed. Note that container
arguments can be generated from iterators using ``RAJA::make_span(begin, len)``.
This is shown in the examples in :ref:`scan-label`.

RAJA also provides *in-place* scans:

 * ``RAJA::inclusive_scan_inplace< exec_policy >(in_container)``
 * ``RAJA::inclusive_scan_inplace< exec_policy >(in_container, operator)``

An in-place scan generates the same output sequence as a non-inplace scan.
However, an in-place scan does not take separate input and output arrays and
the result of the scan operation will appear *in-place* in the input array.

---------------------
RAJA Exclusive Scans
---------------------

Using RAJA exclusive scans is essentially the same as for inclusive scans:

 * ``RAJA::exclusive_scan< exec_policy >(in_container, out_container)``
 * ``RAJA::exclusive_scan< exec_policy >(in_container, out_container, operator)``

and

 * ``RAJA::exclusive_scan_inplace< exec_policy >(in_container)``
 * ``RAJA::exclusive_scan_inplace< exec_policy >(in_container, <operator>)``

.. _scanops-label:

--------------------
RAJA Scan Operators
--------------------

RAJA provides a variety of operators that can be used to perform different
types of scans, such as:

  * ``RAJA::operators::plus<T>``
  * ``RAJA::operators::minus<T>``
  * ``RAJA::operators::multiplies<T>``
  * ``RAJA::operators::divides<T>``
  * ``RAJA::operators::minimum<T>``
  * ``RAJA::operators::maximum<T>``

.. note:: * All RAJA scan operators are in the namespace ``RAJA::operators``.

Commit message:

Cleanup pass, including some document section labels.

docs/sphinx/user_guide/feature/scan.rst, after:

.. ##
.. ## Copyright (c) 2016-22, Lawrence Livermore National Security, LLC
.. ## and other RAJA project contributors. See the RAJA/LICENSE file
.. ## for details.
.. ##
.. ## SPDX-License-Identifier: (BSD-3-Clause)
.. ##

.. _feat-scan-label:

================
Scans
================

RAJA provides portable parallel scan operations, which are basic
parallel algorithm building blocks. They are described in this section.

A few important notes:

.. note:: * All RAJA scan operations are in the namespace ``RAJA``.
          * Each RAJA scan operation is a template on an *execution policy*
            parameter. The same policy types used for ``RAJA::forall`` methods
            may be used for RAJA scans. Please see :ref:`policies-label` for
            more information.
          * RAJA scan operations accept an optional *operator* argument so
            users can perform different types of scan operations. If
            no operator is given, the default is a 'plus' operation and
            the result is a **prefix-sum**.

Also:

.. note:: For scans using the CUDA or HIP back-end, RAJA implementation uses 
          the NVIDIA CUB library or AMD rocPRIM library, respectively. 
          Typically, the CMake variable ``CUB_DIR`` or ``ROCPRIM_DIR` will 
          be automatically set to the location of the CUB or rocPRIM library 
          for the CUDA or rocPRIM installation specified when either back-end
          is enabled. More details for configuring the CUB or rocPRIM library 
          for a RAJA build can be found here: 
          :ref:`build-external-tpl <build-external-tpl-label>`.

Please see the following tutorial sections for detailed examples that use
RAJA scan operations:

 * :ref:`tut-scan-label`.

-----------------
Scan Operations
-----------------

In general, a scan operation takes a sequence of numbers 'x' and a binary
associative operator 'op' as input and produces another sequence of
numbers 'y' as output. Each element of the output sequence is formed by
applying the operator to a subset of the input. Scans come in
two flavors: *inclusive* and *exclusive*.

An **inclusive scan** takes the input sequence

   x = { x\ :sub:`0`\, x\ :sub:`1`\, x\ :sub:`2`\, ... }

and calculates the output sequence:

   y = { y\ :sub:`0`\, y\ :sub:`1`\, y\ :sub:`2`\, ... }

using the recursive definition

   y\ :sub:`0`\ = x\ :sub:`0`

   y\ :sub:`i`\ = y\ :sub:`i-1`\ op x\ :sub:`i`\, for each i > 0

An **exclusive scan** is similar, but the output of an exclusive scan is
different from the output of an inclusive scan in two ways. First, the first
element of the output is the identity of the operator used. Second, the
rest of the output sequence is the same as inclusive scan, but shifted one
position to the right; i.e.,

   y\ :sub:`0`\ = op\ :sub:`identity`

   y\ :sub:`i`\ = y\ :sub:`i-1` op x\ :sub:`i-1`\, for each i > 0

If you would like more information about scan operations, a good overview of
what they are and why they are useful can be found in
`Blelloch Scan Lecture Notes <https://www.cs.cmu.edu/~blelloch/papers/Ble93.pdf>`_. A nice presentation that describes how parallel scans are implemented is `Va Tech Scan Lecture <http://people.cs.vt.edu/yongcao/teaching/cs5234/spring2013/slides/Lecture10.pdf>`_

---------------------
RAJA Inclusive Scans
---------------------

RAJA inclusive scan operations look like the following:

 * ``RAJA::inclusive_scan< exec_policy >(in_container, out_container)``
 * ``RAJA::inclusive_scan< exec_policy >(in_container, out_container, operator)``

Here, 'in_container' and 'out_container' are random access ranges of some
numeric scalar type whose elements are the input and output sequences of the
scan, respectively. The scalar type must be the same for both arrays. The first
scan operation above will be a *prefix-sum* since there is no operator argument
given; i.e., the output array will contain partial sums of the input array. The
second scan will apply the operator that is passed. Note that container
arguments can be generated from iterators using ``RAJA::make_span(begin, len)``.
This is shown in the examples in :ref:`tut-scan-label`.

RAJA also provides *in-place* scans:

 * ``RAJA::inclusive_scan_inplace< exec_policy >(in_container)``
 * ``RAJA::inclusive_scan_inplace< exec_policy >(in_container, operator)``

An in-place scan generates the same output sequence as a non-inplace scan.
However, an in-place scan does not take separate input and output arrays and
the result of the scan operation will appear *in-place* in the input array.

---------------------
RAJA Exclusive Scans
---------------------

Using RAJA exclusive scans is essentially the same as for inclusive scans:

 * ``RAJA::exclusive_scan< exec_policy >(in_container, out_container)``
 * ``RAJA::exclusive_scan< exec_policy >(in_container, out_container, operator)``

and

 * ``RAJA::exclusive_scan_inplace< exec_policy >(in_container)``
 * ``RAJA::exclusive_scan_inplace< exec_policy >(in_container, <operator>)``

.. _feat-scanops-label:

--------------------
RAJA Scan Operators
--------------------

RAJA provides a variety of operators that can be used to perform different
types of scans, such as:

  * ``RAJA::operators::plus<T>``
  * ``RAJA::operators::minus<T>``
  * ``RAJA::operators::multiplies<T>``
  * ``RAJA::operators::divides<T>``
  * ``RAJA::operators::minimum<T>``
  * ``RAJA::operators::maximum<T>``

.. note:: * All RAJA scan operators are in the namespace ``RAJA::operators``.
